Parallax Software maintains a responsible open source policy and
promotes good practices in intellectual property management. Please
read this Agreement carefully. By submitting your Contributions (see
definition below) and clicking ["Sign in with GitHub to agree"], you
agree to all of the terms and conditions defined herein.

Parallax Software, Inc. appreciates your willingness to grant
permission to use your software code checked directly into a source
control system that is available by GitHub Inc ("Contributions") in
conjunction with OpenSTA. By clicking ["Sign in with GitHub to
agree"], you hereby grant to Parallax Software and to recipients of
software distributed with OpenSTA a perpetual, worldwide,
non-exclusive, no-charge, royalty-free, irrevocable license to use,
make, have made, offer to sell, sell, import, reproduce, prepare
derivative works of, publicly display, publicly perform, sublicense,
and distribute your present and future Contributions and such
derivative works as part of OpenSTA.

Nothing in this license shall constitute a copyright transfer or in
any other way infringe your rights to use your own Contributions for
any other purpose. This license is for your protection as a
Contributor as well as the protection of OpenSTA and its users.

1. You represent and warrant that you are the sole owner of the
Contributions and/or have sufficient rights in your Contribution to
grant all rights you grant hereunder.

2. You represent that the Contributions are your original works of
authorship, that you created the Contributions and did not copy them
from another source, and no other person claims, or has the right to
claim, any right in any invention or patent related to the
Contributions.

3. You represent that you are legally entitled to grant the above
license. If your employer has rights to intellectual property that you
create, you represent that you have received permission to make the
Contributions on behalf of that employer, or that your employer has
waived such rights for the Contributions.

4. Finally, it means that you have not entered into any agreements
that would prevent you from granting the rights provided in this
Agreement.

5. You understand that the decision to include the Contribution in any
product or source repository is entirely that of Parallax Software and
this Agreement does not guarantee that the Contributions will be
included in any product, technology or services.

If you become aware of any facts or circumstances related to the
representation above that would make these representations inaccurate
or untrue, you agree to notify Parallax Software promptly with any
details.
